---
layout: post
title: Persistent Identifiers
subtitle: What are PIDs? What are they for? Why are they important and who provides them?
cover-img: /assets/img/PIDs_banner.png
share-img: /assets/img/PIDs_banner.png
tags: [curation, PID]
---

## What are Persistant Identifiers?
Quoted from https://www.openaire.eu/what-is-a-persistent-identifier

A persistent identifier (PID) is a long-lasting reference to a resource. That resource might be a publication, dataset or person. Equally it could be a scientific sample, funding body, set of geographical coordinates, unpublished report or piece of software. Whatever it is, the primary purpose of the PID is to provide the information required to reliably identify, verify and locate it. A PID may be connected to a set of metadata describing an item rather than to the item itself.

There are different PID types for different kinds of resources. In the current research environment we most commonly see two varieties: those for objects (publications, data, software, such as URNs, DOIs, ARKs, Handle) and those for people (researchers, authors, contributors, such as ORCIDs, ISNIs). Many repositories will assign a PID of the former type when an object is deposited.
 


## How are PIDs created and maintained?
Most PIDs are created by individuals or institutional representatives by registering with a PID provider such as DataCite, CrossRef or other such centralised organisations. The individual or institute will need to sign up to each provider and agree to abide by the terms and conditions set by them. In some cases the requirements are set delioberatly very low to ensure there are no barriers to acquiring PIDs. In other cases the agreement requires that the user provide a minimum amount of metadata to be associated with the PID in the centralised registry. For example DataCite requires that every DOI minted by a registrered organisation includes at least an author/creator name, a publisher name, a title, and a release date as well as web based (URL) landing page. Others, such as Handle (.hdl) system only requires the institute to register themselves and pay the fee for the prefix, there are no requirements placed on what metadata should be included with any unique hdl PIDs, although most .hdl authorities do implement some kind of standard such as DublinCore.


## What are PIDs used for?

examples of PIDs

whats the difference between a URL and PID?

Whats the difference between a DOI and PID?

HDL - Handles, and other types of PIDs
ARK - Archival Resource Key
PURL - 
URN - 
SWHID - Software Heritage Library ID